	We think that at no time, and in no country, has the 
position of an author been beset with such peculiar difficulties 
as the Southern writer is compelled to struggle with from 
the beginning to the end of his career. In no country in 
which literature has ever flourished has an author obtained 
so limited an audience. In no country, and at no period that 
we can recall, has an author been constrained by the 
indifference of the public amid which he lived, to publish with
a people who were prejudiced against him. It would scarcely 
be too extravagant to entitle the Southern author the Pariah 
of modem literature. It would scarcely be too absurd if 
we should compare his position to that of the drawer of 
Shakespeare, who stands in a state of ludicrous confusion 
between the calls of Prince Hal upon the one side and of 
Poins upon the other. He is placed, in fact, much in the 
same relation to the public of the North and the public of 
the South, as we might suppose a statesman to occupy who 
should propose to embody in one code a system of laws 
for two neighboring people, of one of which he was a 
constituent, and who yet altogether differed in character, 
institutions and pursuits. The people among whom the 
statesman lived would be very indignant upon finding, as 
they would be sure to find, that some of their interests had 
been neglected. The people for whom he legislated at a  
distance would be equally indignant upon discovering, as they 
would [be] sure to fancy they discovered, that not one of 
their interests had received proper attention. Both parties 
would probably unite, with great cordiality and patriotism, 
in consigning the unlucky statesman to oblivion or the  
executioner. In precisely the same manner fares the poor 
scribbler who has been so unfortunate as to be born South 
of the Potomac. He publishes a book. It is the settled 
conviction of the North that genius is indigenous there, and 
flourishes only in a Northern atmosphere. It is the equally 
firm conviction of the South that genius— literary genius, at 
least— is an exotic that will not flower on a Southern soil. 
Probably the book is published by a Northern house. 
Straightway all the newspapers of the South are indignant 
that the author did not choose a Southern printer, and  
address himself more particularly to a Southern community. 
He heeds their criticism, and of his next book,— published 
by a Southern printer— such is the secret though 
unacknowledged prejudice against Southern authors— he finds 
that more than one half of a small edition remains upon his 
hands. Perhaps the book contains a correct and beautiful 
picture of our peculiar state of society. The North is inattentive 
or abusive, and the South unthankful, or, at most, 
indifferent. Or it may happen to be only a volume of noble 
poetry, full of those universal thoughts and feelings which 
speak, not to a particular people, but to all mankind. It is 
censured at the South as not sufficiently Southern in spirit, 
while at the North it is pronounced a very fair specimen of 
Southern commonplace. Both North and South agree with 
one mind to condemn the author and forget his book. 

	We do not think that we are exaggerating the embarrassments which surround the Southern writer. It 
cannot be denied that on the surface of newspaper and magazine literature there have lately appeared signs that his claims to
respect are beginning to be acknowledged. But, in spite of
this, we must continue to believe, that among a large 
majority of Southern readers who devour English books 
with avidity, there still exists a prejudice— conscious or  
unconscious—against the works of those authors who have 
grown up among themselves. This prejudice is strongest, 
indeed, with a class of persons whose opinions do not find 
expression in the public prints; but it is on that account more 
harmful in its evil and insidious influence. As an instance, 
we may mention that it is not once, but a hundred times, 
that we have heard the works of the first of Southern 
authors alluded to with contempt by individuals who had 
never read anything beyond the title-pages of his books. 
Of this prejudice there is an easy, though not a very  
flattering, explanation. 

	The truth is, it must be confessed, that though an 
educated, we are a provincial, and not a highly cultivated 
people. At least, there is among us a very general want of a 
high critical culture. The principles of that criticism, the 
basis of which is a profound psychology, are almost utterly 
ignored. There are scholars of pretension among us, with 
whom Blair’s Rhetoric is still an unquestionable authority. 
There are schools and colleges in which it is used as a 
textbook. With the vast advance that has been made in 
critical science since the time of Blair few seem to be intimately
acquainted. The opinions and theories of the last century are 
still held in reverence. Here Pope is still regarded by many 
as the most correct of English poets, and here, Kaimes,
after having been everywhere else removed to the top 
shelves of libraries, is still thumbed by learned professors 
and declamatory sophomores. Here literature is still  
regarded as an epicurean amusement; not as a study, at least 
equal in importance, and certainly not inferior in difficulty, 
to law and medicine. Here no one is surprised when some 
fossil theory of criticism, long buried under the ruins of an 
exploded school, is dug up, and discussed with infinite 
gravity by gentlemen who know Pope and Horace by heart, 
but who have never read a word of Wordsworth or Tennyson, 
or who have read them with suspicion, and rejected 
them with superciliousness. 

	In such a state of critical science, it is no wonder that 
we are prudently cautious in passing a favorable judgment 
upon any new candidates for our admiration. It is no wonder 
that while we accept without a cavil books of English and 
Northern reputation, we yet hesitate to acknowledge our 
own writers, until, perhaps, having been commended by 
English or Northern critics, they present themselves to us 
with a “certain alienated majesty.” There is another class of 
critics among us— if critics they can be called— which we 
must not pass over. This class seem disposed to look upon 
literature as they look upon a Bavarian sour-krout, a  
Strasbourg pate, or a New Zealand cutlet of “cold clergyman.” 
It is a mere matter of taste. Each one feels himself at liberty 
to exalt the author— without reference to his real position in 
the world of letters, as settled by a competent tribunal— 
whose works afford him the most amusement. From such a 
principle, of course, the most fantastic and discordant 
opinions result. One regards that fanciful story, the Culprit 
Fay of Drake, as the greatest of American poems; and 
another is indignant if Tennyson be mentioned in the same 
breath with Longfellow. Now, it is good to be independent; 
but it is not good to be too independent. Some respect is 
certainly due to the authority of those who, by a careful and 
loving study of literature, have won the right to speak ex 
cathedra. Nor is that independence, but license, which is 
not founded upon a wide and deep knowledge of critical 
science, and upon a careful and respectful collation of our 
own conclusions, with the impartial philosophical 
conclusions of others. 

	In the course of these remarks, we have alluded to 
three classes of critics, the bigot, the slave, and we cannot 
better characterize the third, than as the autocratic. There is  
yet a fourth, which feels, or professes to feel, a warm interest  
in Southern literature, and which so far is entitled to our 
respect. But, unfortunately, the critical principles of this class 
are quite as shallow as those of any of the others; and we 
notice it chiefly to expose the absurdity of one of its favorite 
opinions, adopted from a theory which some years ago arose 
at the North, and which bore the name of Americanism in 
literature. After the lapse of a period commensurate with 
the distance it had to travel, it reached the remote South, 
where it became, with an intensity of absurdity which is 
admirable indeed, Southernism in literature. Now, if the 
theory had gone to the depth of that which constitutes true 
nationality, we should have no objections to urge against it. 
But to the understandings of these superficial critics, it 
meant nothing more than that an author should confine 
himself in the choice of his subjects to the scenery, the history, 
and the traditions of his own country. To be an American 
novelist, it was sufficient that a writer should select a story, 
in which one half the characters should be backwoodsmen, 
who talked bad Saxon, and the other half should be savages, 
who talked Choctaw translated into very bombastic English. 
To be an American poet, it was sufficient either in a 
style and measure imitated from Pope and Goldsmith, or in 
the more modern style and measure of Scott and Words- 
worth, to describe the vast prairies of the West, the swamps 
and pine forests of the South, or the great lakes and broad 
rivers of the North. It signified nothing to these critics 
whether the tone, the spirit, or the style were caught from 
European writers or not. If a poet, in genuine Scott, or 
genuine Byron, compared his hero to a cougar or grisly 
bear— patriotically ignoring the Asiatic tiger or the African 
lion— the exclamation of the critic was, “How intensely 
American!” 

	We submit that this is a false and narrow criterion,  
by which to judge of the true nationality of the author. Not in 
the subject, except to a partial extent, but in the management 
of the subject, in the tone and bearings of the thought, 
in the drapery, the coloring, and those thousand nameless 
touches, which are to be felt rather than expressed, are the 
characteristics of a writer to be sought. It is in these  
particulars that an author of original genius— no matter what 
what his subject— will manifest his nationality. In fact, true 
originality will be always found identical with true nationality. 
A painter who should paint an American landscape exactly 
in the style of Salvator or of Claude, ought scarcely to be 
entitled an American painter. A poet who should write a 
hymn to Niagara in the blank verse of the Ulysses or the 
Princess, ought not to be entitled an American poet. In a 
word, he alone, who, in a style evolved from his own individual 
nature, speaks the thoughts and feelings of his own deep 
heart, can be a truly national genius. In the works of such a 
man, the character which speaks behind and through him— 
as character does not always speak in the case of men of 
mere talent, who in some respects are usually more or less 
under the sway of more commanding minds— will furnish 
the best and highest types of the intellectual character of 
his countrymen, and will illustrate most correctly, as well as 
most subtly— perhaps most correctly because most subtly—
the nature of the influences around him. In the poetry of 
such a man, if he be a poet, whether its scenes be laid in his 
native country or the land of faery, the pines of his own 
forests shall be heard to murmur, the music of his own 
rivers shall swell the diapason, the flowers of his own soil 
shall bud and bursty though touched perhaps with a more 
ethereal and lasting grace; and with a brighter and more 
spiritual lustre, or with a darker and holier beauty, it will be 
his own skies that look down upon the loveliest landscapes 
of his creation. 

	We regard the theory of Southernism in literature as a 
circumscription, both unnecessary and unreasonable, of the 
privileges of genius. Shakespeare was not less an Englishman 
when he wrote Antony and Cleopatra, than when he dramatized 
the history of the kings of England. Sir Walter was not less
a Scotchman when he drew the characters of Louis XL 
and Charles the Bold, than when he conceived the characters 
of Edie Ochiltree and Balfour of Burley. We do not 
suppose that until this theory germinated in the brain of its 
foolish originator, it ever occurred to an author that in his 
selection of subjects, he was to be bounded by certain 
geographical limits. And if in addition to the many difficulties 
which he has to overcome, the Southern author be expected, 
under the penalty of being pronounced un-Southern in 
tone, and unpatriotic in spirit, never to pass the Potomac on 
one side, or the Gulf on the other, we shall despair of ever 
seeing within our borders a literature of such depth and 
comprehensiveness as will ensure it the respect of other 
countries, or permanence in the remembrance of posterity. 
No! the domain of genius is as wide as the world, and as 
ancient as creation. Wherever the angel of its inspiration 
may lead, it has the right to follow— and whether exhibited 
by the light of tropic suns, or of the Arctic morning, whether
embodied in the persons of ancient heroes, or of modem 
thinkers, the eternal verities which it aims to inculcate shall 
find in every situation, and under every guise, their suitable 
place, and their proper incarnation. 

	We should not like to convey the impression that we 
undervalue the materials for prose and poetry, which may 
be found in Southern scenery, Southern society, or Southern 
history. We are simply protesting against a narrow creed, 
by means of which much injustice may be done to a writer, 
who, though not less Southern in feeling than another who 
displays his Southernism on the surface of his books, yet 
insists upon the right to clothe according to the dictates of 
his own taste, and locate according to the dictates of his 
own thoughtful judgment, the creatures of his imagination. 
At the same time we are not blind to the spacious field which 
is opened to the Southern author within his own immediate 
country. The vast aboriginal forests which so weightily 
oppress us with a sense of antiquity, the mountains, tree- 
clad to the summit, enclosing unexplored Elysiums, the 
broad belt of lowland along the ocean, with its peculiar 
vegetation, the live-oak, stateliest of that stately family, 
hung with graceful tillandsia, the historical palmetto, and 
the rank magnificence of swamp and thicket, the blue 
aureole of the passion flower, the jessamine, with its yellow 
and fragrant flame, and all the wild luxuriance of a bountiful 
Flora, the golden carpet which the rice plant spreads for 
the feet of autumn, and the cotton field white as with a soft, 
warm snow of summer — these are materials— and these are 
but a small part of them— from which a poet may draw an 
inspiration as genuine as that which touched with song the 
lips of English Thomson, or woke to subtler and profounder 
utterance the soul of English Wordsworth. Nor is the structure 
of our social life— so different from that of every other 
people, whether ancient or modern— incapable of being 
exhibited in a practical light. There are truths underlying 
the relations of master and slave; there are meanings beneath 
that union of the utmost freedom with a healthy conservatism, 
which, growing out of those relations, is characteristic 
of Southern thought, of which poetry may avail herself 
not only to vindicate our system to the eyes of the world, 
but to convey lessons which shall take root in the hearts of 
all mankind. We need not commend the poetical themes 
which are to be found in the history of the South; in the 
romance of her colonial period; in the sufferings and 
struggles of her revolution; in the pure patriotism of her 
warriors and statesmen, the sterling worth of her people, 
and the grace, the wit, the purity, the dignity, delicacy and 
self-devotion of her women. He who either in the character 
of poet or novelist shall associate his name with the South 
in one or all of the above-mentioned aspects, will have 
achieved a more enviable fame than any which has yet 
illustrated the literature of America. 

	We pass to a brief discussion of an error still more 
prevalent than the theory just dismissed. We know nothing 
more discouraging to an author, nothing which more clearly 
evinces the absence of any profound principles of criticism, 
than the light in which the labors of the poet and the 
novelist are very generally viewed at the South. The novel 
and the poem are almost universally characterized as light 
reading, and we may say are almost universally estimated 
as a very light and superficial sort of writing. We read novels 
and poems indeed, with some pleasure, but at the same time 
with the tacit conviction that we are engaged in a very 
trivial occupation; and we promise ourselves that, in order 
to make up for the precious moments thus thrown away, we 
shall hereafter redouble our diligence in the study of history 
or of mathematics. It is the common impression that while 
there is much practical utility in a knowledge of Euclid and 
the Calculus, no profit whatever is to be derived from works 
of poetry and fiction. Of two writers, one of whom should 
edit a treatise on the conic sections, and the other should 
give to the world a novel equal in tragic power and interest 
to the Bride of Lammermoor, the former would be considered 
the greater man by nine persons out of ten. 

	It would be from the purpose of this article to go into  
a minute examination of the prejudices upon which these 
opinions are founded. But we may be permitted a few words 
on the subject. What are the advantages which are supposed 
to result from the study of the mathematics— not, we mean, 
to those who are to devote their lives to science, but to that 
more numerous class who, immediately upon graduation, 
fling aside Playfair, and separate into doctors, lawyers, and 
politicians? The answer is, we believe, that the study of 
mathematics is calculated to accustom the student to habits 
of close reasoning, and to increase his powers of concentration. 
Some vague generality is usually added about its influence 
in strengthening the mind. 

	Now, it is a notorious fact that mathematicians are for 
the most part bad reasoners out of their particular province. 
As soon as they get upon topics which do not admit of precise 
definitions and exact demonstrations, and which they, 
nevertheless, invariably insist upon subjecting to precise 
definitions and exact demonstrations, they fall naturally 
enough into all sorts of blunders and contradictions. They 
usually beg the question at the outset, and then by means of 
a most unexceptionable syllogism, they come to a conclusion 
which, though probably false in fact, is yet, it must be confessed, 
always logically consistent with their premises. 

	Now, it will not be denied that such a method of reasoning 
is the very worst possible which could be employed by a lawyer
or a politician. The laws, and their various interpretations,  
the motives, the objects, the interest in their thousand 
contradictory aspects, which must form the staple of 
the arguments of professional and public men, are not to be 
treated like the squares and circles of geometry. Yet that a 
familiarity with mathematical modes of proof does not lead 
to the error of using those modes of proof upon subjects to 
which they are wholly inapplicable, is evident to anybody 
who has noticed the style of argument prevalent among the 
very young orators who have not long cut the apron strings 
which tied them to a too strictly mathematical Alma Mater. 
They bristle all over with syllogisms, write notes in the form 
of captions, invariably open a speech (that is if it be not a 
fourth of July oration, and if they have anything to prove) 
with a statement, and end with Q. E. D. corollary and 
scholium. Not until the last theories have been erased from 
their memory, or until they shall have learned by repeated 
reverses the absurdity of which they are guilty, do they 
begin to reason like men of practical sense. 

	It must not be inferred that we are arguing against the 
study of the mathematics. It has its uses— though we think 
not the uses commonly assigned to it. These we cannot stop 
to particularize, but we may mention that if it could do 
nothing but furnish us with the clearest idea we have of the 
nature of absolute truths, it would still be an important 
study. 

	We shall probably be thought paradoxical when we say 
that we believe that the study of poetry as an art in conjunction 
with the science of criticism— and this not with the design
of writing poetry, but merely to enable the student to 
appreciate and to judge of it— will afford a better preparative 
training than all the mathematics in the world, to the 
legal or political debater. Poetry, as Coleridge well remarks, 
has a logic of its own;  and this logic being more complex, 
more subtle, and more uncertain than the logic of the 
demonstrative sciences, is far more akin than the latter can 
be to the dialectics of common life. And when we consider 
that while we are mastering this logic, we are at the same 
time familiarizing ourselves with the deepest secrets of the 
human heart, imbuing our natures with the most refining 
influences, and storing our minds with the purest thoughts 
and the loveliest pictures of humanity, the utility of poetry 
as a study seems to be established beyond a question. 

	It seems strange, that in this nineteenth century, one 
should be called upon to vindicate poetry from aspersions 
which have been repeatedly and triumphantly disproved. 
Nevertheless, so generally accepted at the South is the 
prejudice which degrades poetry into a mere servant of our 
pleasures, that upon most ears, truths, (elsewhere so 
familiar as to be trite ) upon which it bases a loftier pretension, 
fall with the startling novelty of paradox. How many 
look upon the imaginative faculty simply as the manufacturer 
of pretty conceits; how few know it as the power which, 
by selecting and combining materials never before 
brought together, in fact, produces pictures and characters 
in which there shall be nothing untruthful or unnatural, 
and which shall yet be as new to us as a lately found island in 
the Pacific. How many of us regard poetry as a mere creature 
of the fancy; how few appreciate its philosophy, or 
understand that beneath all the splendor of its diction and 
imagery, there is in its highest manifestations at least a 
substratum of profound and valuable thought; how very few 
perceive the justice of the eloquent definition of Coleridge: 
“That poetry is the blossom and fragrance of all human 
wisdom, human passions, learning, and language;” or are
prepared to see, as it is expressed in the noble verse of 
Taylor, that 

Poetry is Reason’s self -sublimed; 

Tis Reason’s sovereignty, whereunto 

All properties of sense, all dues of wit. 

All fancies, images, perceptions, passions, 

All intellectual ordinance grown up 

From accident, necessity, or custom. 

Seen to be good, and after made authentic; 

All ordinance aforethought, that from science 

Doth prescience take, and from experience law; 

All lights and institutes of digested knowledge. 

Gifts and endowments of intelligence 

From sources living, from the dead bequests,— 

Subserve and minister. 

	We hurry on to the comparative merits of history and 
fiction.

	It is not generally understood that a novel may be more 
truthful than a history, in several particulars— but, perhaps, 
most of all in the delineation of character. The historian, 
hampered by facts which are not seldom contradictory, is 
sometimes compelled to touch and retouch his portrait of 
a character in order to suit those facts. Consequently, he 
will often give us a character not as it existed, but his idea of 
that character— a something, the like of which was never in 
heaven above, nor on the earth beneath. On the other hand, 
the novelist, whose only obligation is to be true to nature, at 
least paints us possible men and women, about whose 
actions we can reason almost with as much accuracy as if 
they had really lived, loved, acted and died. In doing this, he 
at once reaches a higher truth than is often attainable by 
the historians, and imparts to us lessons far more profitable. 
More of human nature can be learned from the novel of Tom 
Jones than from a History of the whole Roman Empire— 
written, at least, as histories are commonly written. Again, 
while it is to history we look for an account of the dynasties, 
the battles, sieges, revolutions, the triumphs and defeats of 
a nation, it is from the historical novel that we glean the best 
idea of that which it is infinitely more important for us to 
know— of the social state, the manners, morals, opinions, 
passions, prejudices, and habits of the people. We do not 
hesitate to say, that of two persons, one of whom has only 
read Hume’s chapter on Richard L, and the other only the 
Ivanhoe of Scott, the latter will be by far the better  
acquainted with the real history of the period. 

	We need not say that we are not quite so silly as to
believe that it is possible, by any force of argument, to bring 
about a reformation in the tastes of the reading community. 
It is, unfortunately, not in the power of a people to confer 
together and say, “Come, now, let us arise, and build up a 
literature.”  We cannot call meetings, and pass resolutions 
to this purpose, as we do with respect to turnpikes, railways, 
and bridges. That genuine appreciation, by which alone 
literature is encouraged and fostered, is a plant of slow 
growth. Still, we think something may be done; but in the 
meanwhile let it not be forgotten that, in spite of every 
disadvantage, the South already possesses a literature which 
calls for its patronage and applause. The fate of that literature 
is a reproach to us. Of all our Southern writers, not one but
Poe has received his due measure of fame. The immense 
resources and versatile powers of Simms are to this day 
grudgingly acknowledged, or contemptuously denied. 
There have been writers among us who, in another country, 
would have been complimented with repeated editions, 
whose names are now almost forgotten, and whose works 
it is now utterly impossible to obtain. While our center-tables 
are littered with the feeble moralizings of Tupper, done up
in very bright morocco; and while the corners of our
newspapers are graced with the glibly versified common- 
-places of Mackey, and of writers even more worthless 
than Mackey, there is, perhaps, scarcely a single bookseller 
in the United States, on whose face we should not 
encounter the grin of ignorance, if we chanced to inquire 
for the Froissart ballads of Philip Pendleton Cooke. 

	It is not without mortification that we compare the 
reception which the North gives to its literature to the stolid 
indifference of the South. There, at least, Genius wears the 
crown, and receives the tributes which are due to it. It is 
true, indeed, that not a few Northern authors have owed 
in part their successes to the art of puffing— an art nowhere 
carried to such a height of excellence as in the cities of 
New York and Boston. It is true that through the magic 
of this art, many a Bottom in literature has been decked 
with the flowers and fed with the apricots and dewberries 
of a short-lived reputation. But it is also true, that there is 
in the reading public of the North a well-founded faith in 
its capacity to judge for itself, a not inconsiderable knowledge 
of the present state of Poetry and Art, and a cordial disposition
to recognize and reward the native authors who address it.

	We are not going to recommend the introduction at 
the South of a system of puffing. “No quarter to the dunce,” 
whether Southern or Northern, is the motto which should 
be adopted by every man who has at heart the interests of 
his country’s literature. Not by exalting mediocrity, not by 
setting dullness on a throne, and putting a garland on the 
head of vanity, shall we help in the smallest degree the 
cause of Southern letters. A partiality so mistaken can only 
serve to depreciate excellence, discourage effort, and disgust 
the man of real ability. We have regretted to see the 
tenderness with which a volume of indifferent poetry is 
sometimes treated— for no other reason that we could 
discover than that it was the work of a Southerner— by 
those few clever and well-meaning critics, of whom the South 
is not altogether destitute. The effect of this ill-judged clemency 
is to induce those who are indisposed to admit the claims
of Southern literature upon their admiration, to look with
suspicion upon every verdict of Southern criticism. 

	We have but one course to suggest to those who are 
willing, from a painful conviction of the blended servility, 
superficiality, and antiquated bigotry of criticism among us, 
to assist in bringing about a reformation. It is to speak the 
rude truth always. It is to declare war equally against the 
slaves of English and Northern opinions, and against 
the slaves of the conventional schools of the eighteenth 
century. If argument fail, perhaps satire may prove a more 
effective weapon. Everything like old fogyism in literature 
should be remorselessly ridiculed. That pert license which 
consults only its own uneducated taste, and that docility 
which truckles to the prestige of a foreign reputation should 
be alike held up to contempt. It should be shown in plain, 
unflattering language that the unwillingness with which 
native genius is acknowledged, is a bitterer slander on the 
country and its intellect than any of the falsehoods which 
defile the pages of Trollope, Dickens, Marryatt, or Basil 
Hall. It would be no injustice to tell those who refuse to 
credit that the South has done anything in prose or poetry, 
that in their own shallowness and stupidity they have found 
the best reasons for their incredulity; and they should be 
sternly reminded, that because a country annually gives 
birth to a thousand noodles, it does not follow that it may 
not now and then produce a man of genius. Nor should any 
hesitation be felt to inquire boldly into the manner in 
which the tastes of our youth are educated. Let it be asked 
on what principle we fill our chairs of belles-lettres; whether 
to discharge properly the duties of a critical teacher, a 
thorough acquaintance with English literature be not a 
rather indispensable requisite, and how it is that in one 
institution a learned professor shall maintain the Course 
of Time to be the greatest of English epics, and in another 
an equally learned professor shall deny, on the ground 
that he could never read it, save as a very disagreeable task, 
the transcendent merits of Paradise Lost. Is it not a fact, 
of which we may feel not unreasonably ashamed, that a 
student may pass four years under these misleaders of 
youth, and yet remain ignorant of that most important 
revolution in imaginative literature— to us of the present day 
the most important of all literary revolutions— which took 
place a little more than half a century ago. The influence 
of the new spiritual philosophy in producing a change from 
a sensuous to a super-sensuous poetry, the vast difference 
between the school represented by Wordsworth, and the 
school represented by Pope, the introduction of that mystical 
element into our verse which distinguishes it from the 
verse of the age of Shakespeare, the theory of that analytical 
criticism which examines a work of art “from the heart 
outwards, not from surface inwards!” and which deduces 
its laws from nature and truth, not from the practice of 
particular writers; these surely are subjects which, in an 
institution devoted to the purpose of education, may not 
be overlooked without censure. At the risk of exciting the 
derisive smiles of those who attach more value to the 
settlement of a doubtful accent, or a disputed quantity, than 
to a just definition of the imaginative faculty, or a correct 
estimation of the scope and objects of poetry, we avow 
our belief that a systematic study of English literature, 
under the guidance of proper expounders— even at the 
expense of the curriculum in other respects— would be 
attended with the highest benefits to the student and the 
community. Such a course of study would assist more than 
anything else in bringing about that improvement in taste 
which we need so much, and for which we must look especially 
to the generation now growing up about us. We do not 
expect much from those whose opinions are already 
formed. It is next to impossible thoroughly to convert a 
confirmed papist; and there are no prejudices so difiicult 
to overcome as the prejudices of pedantry and age. 
After all, the chief impediment to a broad, deep, and 
liberal culture is her own self-complacency. With a strange 
inconsistency, the very persons who decry Southern literature 
are forever extolling Southern taste. Southern learning, 
and Southern civilization. There is scarcely a city of 
any size in the South which has not its clique of amateur 
critics, poets and philosophers, the regular business of 
whom is to demonstrate truisms, settle questions which 
nobody else would think of discussing, to confirm themselves 
in opinions which have been picked up from the rubbish 
of seventy years agone, and above all to persuade each 
other that together they constitute a society not much 
inferior to that in which figured Burke and Johnson, 
Goldsmith and Sir Joshua. All of these being oracles, they 
are unwilling to acknowledge the claims of a professional 
writer, lest in doing so they should disparage their own 
authority. It is time that their self-complacency should be 
disturbed. And we propose satire as the best weapon, 
because against vanity it is the only effective one. He who 
shall convince this, and every other class of critics to which 
we have alluded, that they are not in advance of their age, 
that they are even a little behind it, will have conferred an 
incalculable benefit upon them, and upon the South. 

	We shall not admit that in exposing the deficiencies of 
the Southern public, we have disparaged in the slightest 
degree the intellect of the South. Of that intellect in its 
natural capacity none can conceive more highly than 
ourself. It is impossible not to respect a people from whom 
have sprung so many noble warriors, orators and statesmen. 
And there is that in the constitution of the Southern mind, 
in the Saxon, Celtic and Teutonic elements of which it is 
composed, and in the peculiar influences amidst which 
these elements have been moulded together, a promise of 
that blending of the philosophic in thought with the 
enthusiastic in feeling, which makes a literary nation. Even 
now, while it is in one place trammeled by musty rules and 
canons, and in another left to its own unguided or misguided 
impulses, it would be unjust to deny it a quickness of 
perception, which, if rightly trained, would soon convert 
this essay into a slander and a falsehood. We will not believe 
that a people with such a mental character can remain much 
longer under the dominion of a contracted and illiberal 
culture. Indeed, we think the signs of a better taste may 
already be noticed. The circle of careless or prejudiced 
readers, though large, is a narrowing circle. The circle of 
thoughtful and earnest students, though a small one, is a 
widening circle. Young authors are rising up who have 
won for themselves at least a partial acknowledgment of 
merit. The time must come at last when the public shall 
feel that there are ideas characterizing Southern society,  
as distinguished from Northern and English society, which 
need the exposition of a new literature. There will be a 
stirring of the public mind, an expectation aroused which 
will ensure its own gratification, a demand for Southern 
prose and poetry, which shall call forth the poet and prose 
writer from the crowds that now conceal them, and a  
sympathy established between author and public, which shall 
infuse inspiration into the one, and heighten the pleasure 
and profit of the other. Then, indeed, we may look for a 
literature of which we shall all wear the honors. We shall 
walk over ground made classic by the imaginations of our 
poets, the thoughts we speak shall find illustration in verse 
which has been woven by Southern hearths; and the winds 
that blow from the land, and the waves that wash our level 
coast, shall bear to other nations the names of bards who 
know how to embody the spirit of their country without 
sinking that universality which shall commend their lessons 
to all mankind. 

…………….


“Literature in the South”

By Henry Timrod

Read by Guy William Molnar

Directed by Rhonda Armstrong

Copyright 2013 Georgia Regents University 

All rights reserved





