This discussion naturally divides the subject.  I shall first consider women in the grand light of human creatures, who, in common with men, are placed on this earth to unfold their faculties; and afterwards I shall more particularly point out their peculiar designation.
I wish also to steer clear of an error which many respectable writers have fallen into; for the instruction  which has hitherto been  addressed  to  women,  has  rather  been  applicable to
Ladies, if the little indirect advice, that is scattered  through Sandford and Merton (2) be excepted;  but, addressing  my sex in  a firmer  tone,  I pay  particular  attention  to those in the middle class,  because they appear  to be in the most natural state. Perhaps the seeds of false-refinement, immorality, and vanity, have ever been shed by the great.  Weak, artificial beings, raised above the common wants and affections of their race, in a premature unnatural manner, undermine the very foundation of virtue, and spread corruption through the whole mass of society!  As  a    class  of  mankind  they  have  the strongest claim  to pity;  the education  of the rich tends  to render them vain and helpless, and the unfolding mind is not strengthened by the practice of those duties which dignify the human character.-- They only live to amuse themselves, and by the same law which in nature invariably  produces certain effects, they soon only afford barren amusement.
But as I purpose taking a separate view of the different ranks of society, and of the moral character of women, in each, this hint is, for the present, sufficient; and I have only alluded to the subject, because it appears to me to be the very essence of an introduction to give a cursory account of the contents of the work it introduces.
My own sex,  I hope, will excuse  me, if I treat them like rational   creatures,   instead   of  flattering   their  fascinating graces, and  viewing  them  as  if they  were  in  a  state  of perpetual childhood, unable to stand alone. I earnestly wish to point out in what true dignity and human happiness consists -­ I wish to persuade women to endeavour to acquire strength, both of mind and body, and to convince them that the soft phrases, susceptibility of heart, delicacy of sentiment, and refinement of taste, are almost synonymous with epithets of weakness, and that those beings who are only the objects of pity and that kind of love, which has been termed its sister, will soon become objects of contempt.   Dismissing then those pretty feminine phrases, which the men condescendingly  use to soften our slavish dependence, and despising that weak elegancy of mind, exquisite sensibility, and sweet docility of manners, supposed  to be the sexual characteristics of the weaker  vessel,   I wish to shew  that elegance  is inferior  to virtue, that the first object of laudable ambition  is to obtain a character  as a human being, regardless  of the distinction  of sex;  and  that  secondary  views  should  be  brought  to  this simple touchstone.