This is a rough sketch of my plan; and should I express my conviction with the energetic emotions that I feel whenever I think of the subject, the dictates of experience and reflection will  be  felt  by  some  of  my  readers.  Animated by this important object, I shall disdain to cull my phrases or polish my style; -- I aim at being useful, and sincerity will render me unaffected; for, wishing rather to persuade by the force of my arguments, than dazzle by the elegance of my language, I shall not waste my time in rounding periods, or in fabricating the turgid bombast of artificial feelings, which, coming from the head, never reach the heart.  -- I shall be employed about things, not words! -- and,  anxious  to render  my sex  more respectable   members  of  society,  I shall  try  to  avoid  that flowery diction which has slided from essays into novels, and from novels into familiar letters and conversation.
These pretty superlatives, dropping glibly from the tongue, vitiate the taste, and create a kind of sickly delicacy that turns away from simple unadorned truth, and a deluge of false sentiments and overstretched feelings, stifling the natural emotions of the heart, render the domestic pleasures insipid, that ought to sweeten the exercise of those severe duties, which educate a rational and immortal being for a nobler field of action.
The education of women has, of late, been more attended to than formerly; yet they are still reckoned a frivolous sex, and ridiculed or pitied by the writers who endeavour by satire or instruction to improve them. It is acknowledged  that  they spend  many of the first  years of their lives in acquiring  a smattering of accomplishments; meanwhile strength of body and mind are sacrificed to libertine notions of beauty, to the desire of establishing themselves, -- the only way women can rise in the world,--by marriage. And this desire making mere animals  of them, when they marry they act as such children may  be  expected  to  act:  --  they  dress;   they  paint,  and nickname  God's creatures. (3) -- Surely these weak beings are only fit for a seraglio! -- Can they be expected to govern a family with judgment, or take care of the poor babes whom they bring into the world?
If then it can be fairly deduced from the present conduct of the sex, from the prevalent fondness for pleasure which takes place of ambition and those nobler passions that open and enlarge the soul; that the instruction which women have hitherto received has only tended, with the constitution of civil society, to render them insignificant objects of desire -- mere propagators of fools! --if it can be proved that in aiming to accomplish  them,  without  cultivating their  understandings, they  are  taken  out  of  their  sphere  of  duties,  and  made ridiculous and useless  when the short-lived  bloom of beauty is  over (4),   I presume  that  rational  men  will  excuse  me for endeavouring to persuade  them to become more masculine and respectable.
Indeed the word masculine is only a bugbear:  there is little reason to fear that women will acquire too much courage or fortitude; for their apparent inferiority with respect to bodily strength, must render them, in some degree, dependent on men in the various relations of life, but why should it be increased by prejudices that give a sex to virtue, and confound simple truths with sensual reveries?
Women are, in fact, so much degraded by mistaken notions of female excellence, that I do not mean to add a paradox when I  assert,   that   this  artificial   weakness   produces   a propensity to tyrannize, and gives birth to cunning, the natural opponent  of strength,  which leads them to play off those contemptible infantine airs that undermine esteem even whilst they excite desire. Let men become more chaste and modest, and if women do not grow wiser in the same ratio, it will be clear that they have weaker understandings. It seems scarcely necessary to say, that I now speak of the sex in general. Many individuals have more sense than their male relatives; and, as nothing preponderates where there is a constant struggle for an equilibrium, without it has naturally  more gravity, some women govern their husbands  without degrading  themselves, because intellect will always govern.